.TH inittab 5
'''
.SH NAME
{/etc/inittab} - \fBinit\fR(8) configuration file.
'''
.SH DESCRIPTION
Inittab is a list of commands init should run.
.P
Each relevant line in inittab describes a single entry
containing a command to run and a pid of the process. For each entry,
init spawns a child process, which in turn executes the command.
Init records the pids of the child processes and keeps tracking them
until processes die, so that each entry either holds a pid of a running
process, or an indication that the process is not running.
.P
At any point, init is in one of runlevels 0, 1, ... 9, with zero or more
sublevels a, b, ..., f activated. Each entry has its own runlevel mask,
with zero or more runlevels and zero or more sublevels.
.P
When processing an entry, init decides whether it should be running
or not using current runlevel and entry's runlevel mask.
Subsequentry the entry is either spawned, killed or skipped.
Entries are always started in top-to-bottom order, and killed
bottom-to-top.
.P
In case a tracked process dies, init attempts to respawn the relevant entry
unless the entry is explicitly marked as run-once. A typical configuration
would include run-once system initialization commands and respawn entries
for various system services (daemons).
.P
Along with the entries itself, inittab may also contain environment
variables to be passed to the spawned processes via \fBexecve\fR(2).
'''
.SH SYNTAX
Inittab is a text file parsed in linewise manner. Empty lines are ignored.
.IP "# \fIcomment\fR" 4
Lines starting with # are ignored by init
.IP "\fIvariable\fR=\fIvalue\fR" 4
Add \fIvariable\fR to the environment to be passed to processes started
by init.
.IP "\fIflags\fR  \fIname\fR  \fIcommand\fR" 4
Define an entry. The fields (flags, name and command) may be separated
with spaces or tabs. None of the fields may be omited; use "-" to specify
an empty flags or name. See below for the meaning of each of the three fields.
.P
Init parses and later spawns the entries in top-to-bottom order.
Depending on flags and current runlevel, some entries may be skipped,
but not reordered.
.P
The relative order of environment and process lines is irrelevant.
All spawned processes will get exactly the same environment.
'''
.SS Entry flags
The first field, \fIflags\fR, is a set of characters describing how the entry
should be handled by init. The order of characters is not relevant.
.IP "\fB-\fR" 4
Silently ignored, and can be used to pad runlevel masks.
Without \fBr\fR or \fBw\fR, implies respawning entry.
.IP "\fB+\fR" 4
When stopping this process, wait until other processes die before
sending signal to this one.
.IP "\fBr\fR" 4
Run once. Do not restart the process.
.IP "\fBw\fR" 4
Run once and wait for this process.
Do not restart it, and do not proceed further until it dies.
.P
Exactly one of \fB-+rw\fR characters should be used for any entry.
.IP "\fB0\fR...\fB9\fR" 4
Run this entry on specified runlevel(s).
.IP "\fBa\fR...\fBf\fR" 4
Run this entry only if specified sublevel(s) are active.
.P
Note runlevels are ORed while sublevels are ANDed, so "123ab" means
the entry should be run on levels 1 or 2 or 3, but only with both
sublevels a and b active.
.IP "\fB~\fR" 4
Invert runlevels mask, run this entry on all runlevels except those
specified with 0...9. Sublevels are not inverted.
.IP "\fBx\fR" 4
Disable this entry, do not run anything until \fBtelinit enable \fIname\fR
command is issued.
.IP "\fBk\fR" 4
Kill the process with SIGABRT instead of SIGTERM. Use if the process
in question fails to die on SIGTERM.
.P
The following flags determine how entry failure (non-zero exit status)
is handled.
.IP "\fBq\fR" 4
Disable this entry on failure.
.IP "\fBi\fR" 4
Switch to runlevel 1 on failure.
.IP "\fBj\fR" 4
Switch to runlevel 2 on failure.
.IP "\fBu\fR" 4
Switch to runlevel 4 on failure.
.IP "\fBh\fR" 4
Hush, do not report failures to syslog for this entry.
.P
Examples: \fBw12-4\fR start on runlevels 1, 2 or 4, wait;
\fB01~\fR (re)start on all runlevels except 0 and 1; \fB--2-4k\fR (re)start
on runlevels 2 and 4, use SIGABRT to kill the process.
'''
.SS Naming entries
\fIname\fR is a string used to identify this entry, in particular when
stopping/starting processes with \fBtelinit\fR(8), as well as in syslog
messages. Use \fB-\fR to denote empty name. Non-empty names should be unique.
.P
During reconfiguration, init matches entries with the same name, and transfers
pids from the old configuration. For un-named entries, and in case names do not
match, the old process gets killed and the new one started. This is mostly
relevant for respawning entries.
'''
.SS Commands
The last field, \fIcommand\fR, is the command to run. The field is parsed and
passed as the second argument to \fBexecve\fR(2) call.

Unless specifically told otherwise, init does not call \fBsh\fR(1) to handle
the command, and only does limited command parsing on its own. Single and
double quotes are handled properly, but variable substitution, output
redirects, compound statements etc. and not supported. $PATH,
even if set, has no effect; use absolute names for executables instead.

To use sh, prepend ! to the command. This will cause init to pass the command
directly to /bin/sh -c without any parsing.
'''
.SH USAGE
The primary role of inittab is listing commands needed to bring the system up
after booting the kernel. Typically this involves run-once entries performing
runtime kernel configuration (filesystems, network) and respawning entries
for system daemons and user interface.
.P
Transition to other system states (reboot, shutdown, sleep) may be described
if appropriate, using run-once entries to alter kernel state and runlevel
masks to start or stop certain system services.
'''
.SS Runlevel designation
Certain runlevels have particular meaning assigned to them, either by common
practice or by certain built-in constraints:
.IP "0" 4
System shutdown (reset, halt or poweroff).
.IP "\fB1\fR" 4
Single-user mode, or recovery mode.
.IP "\fB2\fR" 4
Spare recovery runlevel.
.IP "\fB3\fR" 4
Default runlevel, common or multi-user mode
.IP "\fB4\fR-\fB6\fR" 4
Spare regular runlevels.
.IP "\fB7\fR" 4
Spare slippery runlevel.
.IP "\fB8\fR" 4
Sleep.
.IP "\fB9\fR" 4
Suspend.
.P
These designation are mostly guidelines, the user is free to decide how
to use particular runlevels. There are some limitations however.
.P
Runlevel 0 can only be used for system shutdown.
Upon reaching it, init calls \fBreboot\fR(2).
.P
Single-user runlevels 1 and 2 are not in the default entry runlevel mask,
while multi-user levels 3-6 and slippery levels 7-9 are. A respawning entry
without explicitly specified runlevel mask will be started on multi-user
levels only, and will not be restarted after sleep or suspend.
.P
Slippery status of runlevels 7, 8, 9 is hard-coded and can not be changed at runtime.
Also, \fBtelinit\fR(8) commands "sleep" and "suspend" are hard-coded to
invoke runlevels 8 and 9 respectively.
'''
.SS Entering and exiting runlevels
Run-once entries are only spawned during transition from runlevel A to
runlevel B if A is not in entry's runlevel mask and B is. Combined with
negation flag, this allows implementing "on entry" and "on exit" masks.
.P
An entry marked r3 will be run on entering runlevel 3, and entry marked
r3~ will be run upon exiting runlevel 3 to any other runlevel.
.P
The same applies to the default runlevel mask, which is 3-9. An entry
marked just "r" will be run when the system boots (in non-recovery mode),
while an entry marked "r~" will be run on system shutdown (from
a non-recovery mode). A typical application is to run mount -a as "r"
and umount -a as "r~".
.P
Due to special status of runlevel 0, entries marked r0 will be run
during shutdown and r0~ entries will be run during boot. This differs
from r~ and r respectively in case runlevels 1 and 2 are considered: r0~
entry will be started when entering runlevel 1, r entry will not.
'''
.SS Foreground daemons
Any process doing \fBdaemon\fR(3) style startup will confuse init if configured
as an s-type entry, since init has no way to track the daemonized child process
and will attemp to take action immediately after the parent exits.
.P
Whenever possible, processes must be intructed to run in foreground mode.
Most daemons allow this; check relevant man pages.
'''
.SS Slippery runlevels
When init reaches a regular, non-slippery runlevel, it stays there.
Upon reaching a slippery runlevel, init starts switching back to the original
runlevel immediately.
.P
Slippery runlevels are intended to be used for sleep-like states,
or generally for any system state that coincides with a process running.
In case of sleep, the command is "echo mem > /sys/power/state",
or possibly \fBpm-suspend\fR(8).
.P
Enter/exit rules apply to slippery runlevels as well. Pre-sleep run-once
commands should be marked r8 while wakeup commands should go with r8~.
.P
Some daemons may not be able to sleep, and must be stopped before entering
sleep mode and restarted after waking up. To implement this, remove relevant
slippery runlevel from daemon's mask; \fBm\fR and \fBz\fR flags may come
handy here.
'''
.SH COMPATIBILITY
This page describes inittab format for \fB{INIT}\fR package.
It is not compatible with the traditional SysVinit format.
.P
SysVinit format uses four-field colon-separated entry description:
.IP "\fIname\fB:\fIrunlevels\fB:\fIaction\fB:\fIcommand\fR" 8
.P
The meaning of \fIname\fR and \fIcommand\fR is the same;
\fIrunlevels\fR field, when non-empty, closely matches \fB[0-9a-c]\fR in \fIflags\fR.
.P
Common values for the 3rd field, \fIaction\fR, and their equivalents for {INIT}:
.IP "\fBrespawn\fR" 4
Respawning entry, \fB-\fR in \fIflags\fR.
.IP "\fBonce\fR" 4
Run-once entry, \fBr\fR in \fIflags\fR.
.IP "\fBwait\fR" 4
Same as \fBw\fR in \fIflags\fR.
.IP "\fBboot\fR, \fBbootwait\fR, \fBsysinit\fB" 4
Same as \fBr0~\fR, \fBw0~\fR, \fBw0~\fR respectively, placed close to the top of inittab.
.IP "\fBondemand\fR" 4
Respawning entry for sublevels a-c.
.IP "\fBpowerwait\fR, \fBpowerfail\fR, \fBpowerokwait\fR" 4
Entries to run on certain UPS signals; not supported by {INIT}.
.IP "\fBctrlaltdel\fR, \fBkbrequest\fR" 4
Entries to run on SIGTERM and SIGWINCH respectively; not supported by {INIT}.
.P
SysVinit-compatible implementations tend to use initscripts system instead of
\fBinitdir\fR(5), making automated translation between two formats pointless.
Shutdown/reboot handling differs as well, and sleep modes are not typically
supported.
.P
Because of incompatibilities, translating SysV-style inittab for use with {INIT}
rarely makes sense. Instead, these section should be used to understand the meaning
of a particular SysV-style configuration, allowing later re-implementation using
{INIT} approaches.
'''
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBinit\fR(8), \fBtelinit\fR(8)
