.TH init 8
'''
.SH NAME
{init} \- system supervisor.
'''
.SH SYNOPSIS
{/sbin}/{init} [\fIkernel options\fR]
'''
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB{init}\fR is the first and only process kernel starts.
It is expected to bring up the system, start daemons and user interface.
.P
During normal operation, init starts processes listed in inittab, and keeps
restarting them unless when they die unless told otherwise.
.P
The set of processes to start is determined by current runlevel.
Upon startup, init switches to its default runlevel, initdefault.
Runlevel can be changed at any time, prompting a change in the running
processes.  Individual processes can be started or stopped on demand.
.P
All communication with init occurs via a socket, see \fB{telinit}\fR(8).
Kernel does not expect init to exit, ever. In case it does, kernel panics.
'''
.SH USAGE
Kernel starts /sbin/init unless init= option is passed to the kernel during boot.
Check Documentation/kernel-parameters.txt, Documentation/init.txt from the kernel source 
for further information, as well as documentation for your bootloader (\fBgrub\fR, \fBuboot\fR etc)
on how to pass kernel options.
.P
Passing "1", "2", ..., "9" among kernel options overrides \fIinitdefault\fR setting.
Other kernel options are ignored. Init does not pass kernel options to any of the scripts it starts.
.P
During startup, init must be able to read its configuration files, {/etc/inittab}, unless
it has a fallback inittab built in.
.P
The only way to contact a running init instance is to write to its control socket, {@initctl}.
See \fB{telinit}\fR(8).
'''
.SH CONFIGURATION
Primary configuration file is {/etc/inittab}, see \fB{inittab}\fR(8). The only other
files init will read are those explicitly mentioned in inittab.

During startup and upon receiving a reconfiguration request, init stores the data read
from inittab in memory and does not try to re-read any of the files later.
'''
.SH ENVIRONMENT
init does not use any environment variables and does not pass any inherited environment
to child processes.
.P
The only variables processes spawned by init see are those set in \fB{inittab}\fR(8).
All spawned processes get exactly the same environment.
.P
It is advised to set PATH value in inittab.
In most cases this is also enough for normal operation.
'''
.SH SIGNALS
{init} reopens its control socket on SIGHUP.
However, configuration is not reloaded, use \fB{telinit}\fR(8) for that.
.P
Other user signals are ignored.
'''
.SH FILES
.IP "{/etc/inittab}" 4
Primary configuration file. See \fB{inittab}\fR(5).
.IP "{@initctl}"
Unix domain socket, for telinit communication. See \fB{telinit}\fR(8) and \fBunix\fR(7).
'''
.SH NOTES
This page describes init from {INIT} package. Other implementations, in particular
sysvinit, behave somewhat differently.
'''
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB{telinit}\fR(8), \fB{inittab}\fR(5).
