.TH run 8
'''
.SH NAME
\fBrun\fR \- set process properties and exec specified command.
'''
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrun\fR [\fIoptions\fR] \fIcommand\fR \fIargs\fR ...
'''
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBrun\fR executes specified command, possibly setting effective uid/gid,
priority, ulimits, redirecting output and adding its pid to cgroups.
'''
.SH USAGE
The following options are accepted:
.IP "\fB-u\fR\fIuser\fR" 4
Set user, see \fBsetuid\fR(2).
.IP "\fB-g\fR\fIgroup\fR" 4
Set group, see \fBsetgid\fR(2). Multiple \fB-g\fR also set supplementary groups, see \fBsetgroups\fR(2)
.IP "\fB-X\fR\fIcgroup\fR" 4
Add process to specified cgroup.
.IP "\fB-C\fR\fIdir\fR" 4
Change working directory to \fIdir\fR.
.IP "\fB-l\fR\fIfile\fR" 4
Redirect stdout and stderr to \fIfile\fR.
.IP "\fB-o\fR\fIfile\fR" 4
Redirect stdout to \fIfile\fR.
.IP "\fB-e\fR\fIfile\fR" 4
Redirect stderr to \fIfile\fR.
.IP "\fB-n\fR" 4
Redirect stdout and stderr to /dev/null.
.IP "\fB-s\fR" 4
Start a new session by calling \fBsetsid\fR(2).
.IP "\fB-R\fR\fIdir\fR" 4
Change root directory to \fIdir\fR.
Arguments for \fB-C\fR, \fB-l\fR, \fB-o\fR, \fB-e\fR will be taken relative to the new root.
.IP "\fB-r\fIN\fR" 4
Change process priority (renice) to \fIN\fR, see \fBsetpriority\fR(2).
Note \fBrun\fR uses kernel scale 1..40, with default priority 20 and
highest priority 1.
.IP "\fB-u\fR\fImask\fR" 4
Set \fBumask\fR(2) for the spawned process.
.IP "\fB-y\fR" 4
Set stdout as the controlling TTY; see TIOCSCTTY in \fBtty_ioctl\fR(4).
.IP "\fB-c\fR" 4
Exec \fBsh -c \fIcommand args\fR instead of just \fIcommand args\fR.
.IP "\fB+\fIc\fIN\fR[\fB/\fIM\fR]" 4
Set process ulimits. \fIN\fR is soft limit, \fIM\fR is hard limit;
in case only one number is specified, equal hard and soft limits are set.
Possible limits with respective C constants (see \fBsetrlimits\fR(2)):
.PD 0
.RS
.TP
\fBa\fR size of the process's virtual memory (RLIMIT_AS)
.TP
\fBc\fR size of core files created (RLIMIT_CORE)
.TP
\fBd\fR size of a process's data segment (RLIMIT_DATA)
.TP
\fBe\fR scheduling priority (RLIMIT_NICE)
.TP
\fBf\fR size of files written (RLIMIT_FSIZE)
.TP
\fBi\fR number of pending signals (RLIMIT_SIGPENDING)
.TP
\fBl\fR size that may be locked into memory (RLIMIT_MEMLOCK)
.TP
\fBm\fR resident set size (RLIMIT_RSS)
.TP
\fBn\fR number of open files (RLIMIT_NOFILE)
.TP
\fBp\fR number of threads (RLIMIT_NPROC)
.TP
\fBq\fR number of bytes in POSIX message queues (RLIMIT_MSGQUEUE)
.TP
\fBr\fR real-time scheduling priority (RLIMIT_RTPRIO)
.TP
\fBs\fR stack size (RLIMIT_STACK)
.TP
\fBt\fR amount of cpu time in seconds (RLIMIT_CPU)
.TP
\fBx\fR number of file locks (RLIMIT_LOCKS)
.TP
\fBT\fR time in microseconds process with real-time
schedule policy may consume without making a blocking syscall (RLIMIT_RTTIME)
.RE
.PD 1
.P
'''
.SH FILES
.IP "\fB{/var/log}\fR" 4
Default output directory for \fB-o\fR, \fB-e\fR and \fB-l\fR.
.IP "\fB{/sys/fs/cgroup}\fR" 4
Default cgroup directory for \fB-C\fR.
'''
.SH ENVIRONMENT
PATH is used to find specified command. See \fBexecvp\fR(1).
'''
.SH NOTES
This page describes /sbin/run, a tool normally only available to the root user.
For gdb simulator front-end typically installed as /usr/bin/run,
see \fBrun\fR(1).
'''
.SH SEE ALSO
Similar utilities: \fBsu\fR(1), \fBsudo\fR(1), \fBrunuser\fR(1),
\fBulimit\fR in \fBbash\fR(1),
\fBnice\fR(1), \fBcgexec\fR(1), \fBsetsid\fR(1).
.P
Syscalls: \fBsetresuid\fR(2), \fBsetresgid\fR(2), \fBsetrlimit\fR(2),
\fBsetpriority\fR(2), \fBexecve\fR(2), \fBsetsid\fR(2).
.P
General concepts: \fBcredentials\fR(7), documentation/cgroups/ from the kernel
source tree.
